A financial situation report, or FSR,
is a document that provides senior management with the most
up-to-date financial picture
and the best estimates of forecast spending.
This document supports them in making informed decisions
to properly address budget shortfalls or pressures
and reallocate surpluses.
Your department may have a different name for this report.
Find out what that is.
As a manager, you are expected to provide regular updates
and forecasts for your responsibility centre
throughout the year.
You are also required to provide explanations on variances
in order to provide accurate information
and make sure the financial system is updated.
But don’t worry, you won’t be doing this alone!
This is usually led by your organization’s
Finance section at specific times in the year.
They will provide support and send out instructions
to provide templates, guidelines,
links, due dates, etc.
Work with your administrative staff to complete these tasks.
Let’s see what you already know about FSRs by doing a quick match-up game!
The fiscal year starts on April 1
and is divided by month, into periods.
P1 is April, P2 is May, P3 is June, and so forth.
Typically, key reporting periods are P6 (September),
P9 (December),
and a year-end report in P12 (March).
Because P6 (September) is midway through the year,
it offers senior management a good picture of the organization's
finances and allows them to make decisions that will influence year-end results.
For example, they could decide to reallocate funds to different priorities.
P9 (December) is often the last opportunity to influence year-end results.
Departments may ask managers to provide a forecast in P9
that is within a certain percentage of the year-end amount.
The Treasury Board Secretariat uses data from the P9 report
to inform the Department of Finance
of government-wide planned spending
so that they have a holistic view.
Year-end data at P12
is used by your department to report their overall financial results.
It also forms part of the Departmental Results Report, or DRR.
The most important information you will need to provide in the
FSR is your forecast.
In other words, you’ll need to estimate the
amount of money that you are going to spend
to complete your activities before the end of the fiscal year.
You can request that your administrative professional pull
a detailed financial report from
the financial system
with information on the budget, commitments and actual expenditures.
You will compare this to the FSR.
Here are some of the things you can do to get a good sense of where you’re at,
which will allow you to make solid estimates for the rest of the year:
Ensure that salary forecasts are accurate and up to date.
Account for any incoming or outgoing funding.
Follow up on travel claims and outstanding invoices.
Ensure journal vouchers are posted,
this will correct the data in the financial system.
Close commitments that are no longer required,
and reconcile your acquisition card statement against commitments.
Now, answer the following questions to the best of your abilities
and let’s practise preparing a financial situation report!
Another important task when completing your FSR
is to review your salary and O&M forecasts.
This will allow you to identify shortfalls and pressures that
may require approval for additional resources.
Or surpluses to signal potential carry forward amounts.
You will have to explain the reasons for any variances
and provide mitigation strategies for risks.
Let’s practise updating the Annual Forecast!